[page 7]
## Glossary
Cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) A group of disorders of the heart and blood vessels that include coronary heart disease and cerebrovascular disease. Diabetic ketoacidosis and hyperosmolar hyperglycaemia Life-threatening conditions characterized by fluid and electrolyte depletion, high blood glucose levels and metabolic acidosis (metabolic acidosis may be absent in hyperosmolar hyperglycaemia). Dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors (DPP-4 inhibitors or gliptins) Oral hypoglycaemic agents used in treating type 2 diabetes. They suppress the degradation of incretins by blocking the action of the enzyme dipeptidyl-peptidase 4. This stimulates insulin secretion and suppresses glucagon release. HbA1c Haemoglobin glycated by non-enzymatic attachment of glucose to haemoglobin. The concentration of HbA1c is the most commonly used measure of chronic glycaemia in clinical trials and diabetes management. It is considered to reflect the integrated mean glucose level over the previous 8–12 weeks. Hypoglycaemia Potentially life-threatening low concentration of blood glucose, most frequently a side-effect of pharmacological treatment. There is no universally agreed definition. In studies the definitions of hypoglycaemia are most frequently in the range <4 mmol/L to ≤ 2.8 mmol/L. Severe hypoglycaemia is most frequently defined as a symptomatic condition that requires the assistance of a third person for resuscitative actions. Insulin analogues Insulins different from any occurring in nature and derived from human insulin by modifying its structure to change the pharmacokinetic profile. Metformin A biguanide oral hypoglycemic agent used in treating type 2 diabetes. It decreases glucose production by the liver and increases the insulin sensitivity of body tissues. Neutral Protamine Hagedorn (NPH or isophane) insulin An intermediate-acting insulin preparation used in type 1 and type 2 diabetes. It is produced by crystallizing zinc-insulin-protamines at neutral pH. It is called neutral protamine Hagedorn for inventor Hans Christian Hagedorn. Sodium-glucose co-transporters type 2 inhibitors (SGLT-2 inhibitors) Oral hypoglycaemic agents used in treating type 2 diabetes. They lower blood glucose by causing the kidneys to remove glucose from the body through the urine. Sulfonylureas Oral hypoglycemic agents used in treating type 2 diabetes. They stimulate insulin secretion by the pancreas.
[page 8]
Thiazolidinediones (glitazones) Oral hypoglycaemic agents used in treating type 2 diabetes. They work by lowering insulin resistance – a core physiologic defect in those with type 2 diabetes. Type 1 diabetes Diabetes caused by the destruction of pancreatic beta-cells, resulting in lack of insulin production by the pancreas and need for insulin injections for survival. Type 2 diabetes Diabetes characterized by various degrees of disorders of insulin action in the body and insulin secretion by the pancreas. Insulin injections are not needed for survival, but might be needed for controlling blood glucose levels.
[page 9]
## Executive summary
Diabetes is a chronic, progressive disease characterized by elevated blood glucose levels. Diabetes can lead to complications such as cardiovascular disease, damage to eyes, kidneys and nerves, and premature death. Globally, more than 400 million adults live with diabetes, and diabetes directly caused 1.6 million deaths in 2015. Blood glucose management has an important role in preventing the development and progression of complications in both type 1 and type 2 diabetes. The objective of the guidelines is to provide public health guidance on pharmacological agents for managing hyperglycaemia in type 1 and type 2 diabetes for use in primary health-care in low-resource settings. These guidelines update the WHO Package of Essential NCD Interventions (WHO PEN) for primary care in low-resources settings recommendations for managing hyperglycaemia, reviewing several newer oral agents: dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors (DPP-4 inhibitors), sodium-glucose co-transporter 2 inhibitors (SGLT-2 inhibitors) and thiazolidinediones (TZDs). These agents have formerly been reviewed as first-line treatment options by the WHO Expert Committee on the Selection and Use of Essential Medicines and were not found to be superior to metformin and sulfonylurea. These guidelines consider their use as second- and third- line treatment for hyperglycaemia in type 2 diabetes. The guidelines also present new recommendations on the selection of type of insulin (analogue versus human insulin) for adults with type 1 diabetes and in adults with type 2 diabetes for whom insulin is indicated. WHO PEN recommendations on other aspects of diabetes treatment have not been updated because priority was given to the area where the majority of changes in evidence and practice have occurred since the publication of WHO PEN. The guidelines were developed in accordance with the WHO Handbook for Guideline Development. In brief, the WHO Steering Group, in collaboration with the Guideline Development Group, developed key questions and rated outcomes to identify those critical for the guideline development. Systematic reviews of the evidence were used to build Summary of Findings tables according to the Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluations (GRADE) methodology. The Guideline Development Group developed recommendations, considering the strength of the evidence; the balance between desirable and undesirable effects; resource requirements and cost-effectiveness; health equity; acceptability (including patient preferences); and feasibility. Key recommendations of the guidelines are: Hypoglycaemic agents for second and third-line treatment in type 2 diabetes 1. Give a sulfonylurea* to patients with type 2 diabetes who do not achieve glycaemic control** with metformin alone or who have contraindications to metformin (strong recommendation, moderate quality evidence). Remarks * Glibenclamide should be avoided in patients aged 60 years and older. Sulfonylureas with a better safety record for hypoglycaemia (e.g. gliclazide) are preferred in patients for whom hypoglycaemia is a concern (people who are at risk of falls, people who have impaired awareness of hypoglycaemia, people who live alone, people who drive or operate machinery
[page 10]
as part of their job). ** The WHO PEN protocol recommends a target fasting blood glucose of <7 mmol/L (126 mg/dl). However, an individualized approach is encouraged in setting the patient’s target level for glycaemic control, taking into account their comorbidities, risks from medication side-effects and their likely benefit from tight glycaemic control in view of life expectancy. 2. Introduce human insulin treatment to patients with type 2 diabetes who do not achieve glycaemic control with metformin and/or sulfonylurea (strong recommendation, very low-quality evidence). 3. If insulin is unsuitable*, a DPP-4 inhibitor, SGLT-2 inhibitor or a TZD may be added (weak recommendation, very low-quality evidence). Remark * Insulin treatment could be unsuitable when circumstances make its use difficult (e.g. persons who live alone and are dependent on others to inject them with insulin). Insulin 4. Use human insulin to manage blood glucose in adults with type 1 diabetes, and in adults with type 2 diabetes for whom insulin is indicated (strong recommendation, low-quality evidence**). Remarks * Recommendation 4 covers both short-acting (regular human insulin (RHI) and intermediate-acting human insulin (NPH insulin). **The recommendation is strong because evidence of better effectiveness of insulin analogues is lacking and human insulin has a better resource-use profile. 5. Consider long-acting insulin analogues to manage blood glucose in adults with type 1 or type 2 diabetes who have frequent severe hypoglycaemia with human insulin (weak recommendation,* moderate-quality evidence for severe hypoglycaemia). Remark *Recommendation 5 is a weak recommendation reflecting the lack of, or very low-quality evidence for, any of the long-term outcomes such as chronic diabetes complications and mortality, and the considerable higher costs for long-acting insulin analogues compared to intermediate-acting human insulin.
[page 11]
## 1. Introduction
Diabetes mellitus (hereafter referred to as diabetes) is a chronic, progressive disease characterized by elevated blood glucose levels. Diabetes can lead to complications such as cardiovascular disease (CVD) and premature death, and can damage eyes, kidneys and nerves. Globally, more than 400 million adults live with diabetes – a disease that caused 1.6 million deaths in 2015 (1, 2). People with diabetes who have higher blood glucose levels are more likely to develop complications than those with lower blood glucose levels. Blood glucose management has an important role in preventing the development and progression of complications in both type 1 and type 2 diabetes. In 2013 the World Health Organization (WHO) published the WHO Package of Essential Non-Communicable Diseases Interventions (WHO PEN) for primary care in low-resource settings. These guidelines are based on a public health approach, which means focusing primarily on the health needs of a population rather than managing individual cases. This approach ensures the widest possible access to services and medicines at population level; supports a simplified and standardized approach; and balances implementing the best-proven standard of care with what is feasible on a large-scale in resource-limited settings. With respect to managing diabetes, the main elements of a public health approach include: integrating services at the primary care level; task sharing; using simplified drug formularies; providing care and drugs free of charge; and introducing simple clinical monitoring. The WHO–PEN recommendations for control of glycaemia in people with type 2 diabetes include diet, physical activity and metformin as first-line treatment; sulfonylurea as second-line treatment (or first-line treatment if metformin is contraindicated); and insulin as third line treatment. In the past decade new classes of oral hypoglycaemic agents have become available, including dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors (DPP-4 inhibitors); sodium-glucose co-transporter type 2 inhibitors (SGLT-2 inhibitors); and thiazolidinediones (TZDs). These agents work through different pathways to those of sulfonylureas and metformin. WHO Member States frequently seek guidance on the use of newly marketed oral hypoglycaemic agents, particularly because of their high price. Clinicians and policy-makers also frequently seek guidance on the place of insulin analogues which are intensively marketed by manufacturers. Indeed, some countries have documented expenditures on insulin analogues which surpassed the total budget for insulin, leading to shortages of insulin for part of the diabetic population that needed it (3, 4). A study of 35 developing countries found that people with diabetes had a substantially higher risk of incurring catastrophic personal medical expenditures than their peers without diabetes (5). In guidelines of high-income countries the newer oral medicines and insulin analogues are deemed equally suitable and interchangeable with sulfonylurea and human insulin for treatment intensification (6, 7). For poorer health systems or where the majority of the population pays out of pocket, price is a more important consideration when available evidence shows similar effectiveness.
[page 12]
## 1.1 Scope and aim of guidelines
These guidelines aim to provide public health guidance on pharmacological agents for managing glycaemia in type 1 and type 2 diabetes for use in primary health-care in low-resource settings. The recommendations target the general adult, non-pregnant diabetes population. These guidelines update WHO PEN recommendations on the choice of second- and third-line treatment for type 2 diabetes based on a review of the evidence regarding the three new oral hypoglycaemic agents: dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors (DPP-4 inhibitors); sodium-glucose co-transporter type 2 inhibitors ( SGLT-2 inhibitors); thiazolidinediones (TZDs); and insulin analogues. The new oral medicines have not been shown to lower glycaemia more effectively than metformin and sulfonylurea as first-line treatment and have thus not been included in the WHO Model List of Essential Medicines when reviewed by the WHO Expert Committee on the Selection and Use of Essential Medicines, nor are they recommended as first-line treatment options in evidence-based guidelines of high-income countries (8, 9, 10). However, they might be suitable to intensify treatment in cases where metformin and/or sulfonylurea treatment fail to control glycaemia. Before the development of newer oral agents, treatment options for these patients were limited to insulin. These guidelines also present new recommendations on selecting the type of insulin (human insulin versus insulin analogues) as insulin is used in primary health care in some low- and middle-income countries. The long-acting insulin analogues considered are detemir and glargine, and the short-acting insulins aspart, lispro and glulisine. These guidelines do not consider the newer 100U and 200U insulin degludec nor 300U insulin glargine because of lack of direct comparisons with NPH insulin. The guidelines provide the basis for selecting medicines for blood glucose control in countries’ own national guidelines for diabetes management. They are not an update of all WHO PEN recommendations for management of diabetes. The scope has been limited to agents for glycaemic control because that field is a dynamic one and has seen more change in evidence and practice in recent years than have other aspects of diabetes management (for example, blood pressure and blood lipids control, or screening for and management of complications). The objectives of these guidelines are:  To consider the use of DPP-4 inhibitors, SGLT-2 inhibitors, and TZDs as second- and third-line treatment after metformin and sulfonylurea for controlling hyperglycaemia in type 2 diabetes in non-pregnant adults, including whether these oral agents are preferable to insulin.  To provide guidance regarding the use of insulin analogues for type 1 and type 2 diabetes. Evidence-based protocols for managing diabetes in primary health care, including managing CVD risk and screening for complications, are available in the WHO PEN 2013 and are not repeated in this guideline.
[page 13]
## 1.2 Target audience
This guideline targets policy-makers, national diabetes programme managers, procurement officers , clinicians and health care professionals responsible for developing local protocols for treating diabetes that will be used in primary care units in low-resource settings. The recommendations in the guideline would be also relevant for decisions at secondary and tertiary health care levels, and where national recommendations and protocols do not exist. Other potential users include institutions for education of health care workers, as well as nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and relief agencies, to guide resource allocation.
## 2. Methods for developing the guidelines
## 2.1 Guideline contributors
WHO established three groups to develop these guidelines: 1. An internal WHO Guideline Steering Group to coordinate the guideline development process. 2. A Guidelines Development Group (hereafter referred to as the Guideline Group) composed of diabetes physicians and endocrinologists, researchers and academics, programme managers and representatives of patients’ groups to review the evidence and develop recommendations. WHO selected members of the Guideline Group based on relevant expertise but also considered appropriate representation by region and sex. 3. An External Peer Review Group composed of technical experts, representatives of diabetes patient groups, and ministries of health from low-resource countries to provide peer review of the guidelines. Appendix 1 lists the contributors in each group. Appendix 2 describes the process for declaring and managing conflicts of interest.
## 2.2 Outcome rating
Members of the WHO Steering Group, in consultation with the Guideline Group, developed two initial lists of treatment outcomes for type 1 and type 2 diabetes. The Guideline Group then indicated whether it considered each outcome critical (rated 7–9), important (rated 4–6) or not important (rated 1–3) for formulating the recommendations. The average of the scores was then used to identify the outcomes critical to decision-making (Appendix 3).
## 2.3 Reviews of evidence
The WHO Steering Group, with the participation of the Guideline Group, determined the scope of the guidelines and identified three questions in population, intervention, comparison, and outcomes (PICO) format to guide the systematic reviews (Appendix 3). A systematic search was carried out in PubMed to identify existing systematic reviews answering the PICO questions. Suitable systematic reviews were then evaluated using the Assessing the Methodological Quality of Systematic Reviews (AMSTAR) tool and if they were recent and of good quality they were used to inform the guidelines (Appendix 4).
[page 14]
Four systematic reviews informed the guideline development process (6, 11, 12, 13). In addition, preliminary results of a Cochrane Systematic Review update were presented at the Guideline Group meeting. Primary studies were searched for potential updating of the Tricco et al review (11) of long-acting analogues. Only two relevant trials in adults were identified. The review was not updated with these new studies because it already had sufficient power to detect a clinically significant difference in short-term outcomes (moderate quality evidence) and the new study results were consistent with the review meta-analysis results. The new studies provided no additional evidence on the long-term critical outcomes, as they were not designed for that purpose. The other systematic reviews were considered to be acceptably recent. Three the systematic reviews (6, 11, 12) used network meta-analysis. This method allows comparison of the relative effectiveness of treatments even if no studies compare them directly (14) and can also improve the precision of the direct estimates (15). However, severe imbalance in terms of the amount of evidence for each intervention may affect the power and reliability of the overall analysis. Network meta-analysis requires the same assumptions as pairwise methods (similarity of studies in terms of effect modifiers; no relevant heterogeneity between trial results) and an additional assumption that there must not be any relevant discrepancy and inconsistency between direct and indirect evidence (16). Because the method is more complex than pairwise meta-analysis, the interpretation of results and evaluation of whether assumptions have been met is more difficult. Although the use of network meta-analysis for WHO guideline development is recent, the method is well established within national health technology assessment agencies. The method has also recently been adopted by Cochrane and it is gaining importance for the optimal evaluation of competing interventions (17). The health economist provided supporting evidence with two narrative reviews of publications on cost-effectiveness of the newer medications as intensification treatment (Appendix 7). Two narrative reviews of publications on patient preferences also informed the decision making (Appendix 8). One review examined whether patients with type 1 diabetes preferred insulin analogues to human insulin. The other review examined whether patients preferred oral agents to insulin when intensification of treatment was necessary for controlling blood glucose levels. This review also examined which treatment attributes were valued by patients.
## 2.4 Quality of evidence and strength of recommendations
The Guideline Group examined the quality of evidence and formulated the recommendations using the GRADE methodology (18). In the GRADE process, the quality of a body of evidence is defined as the extent to which one can be confident that the reported estimates of effect (desirable or undesirable) available from the evidence are close to the actual effects of interest. The strength of the recommendations reflects the degree of confidence of the Guideline Group that the desirable effects (e.g. beneficial health outcomes) of the recommendations outweigh the undesirable effects (e.g. adverse effects). Systematic review authors or members of the Steering Group with the help of the methodologist developed Summary of findings tables. For standard meta-analyses, the quality of the evidence was captured in Summary of findings tables. For network meta-analysis, the evidence was summarized in treatment matrices that allow comparison of all evaluated treatments (19). With
[page 15]
the help of the methodologist, the quality of the evidence derived from network meta-analysis was evaluated using approaches described in two existing papers (20, 21). The following levels of assessment of the evidence were used in the GRADE profiles: Evidence level Rationale High  Further research is very unlikely to change our confidence in the estimate of effect. Moderate  Further research is likely to have an important impact on our confidence in the effect and may change the estimate. Low  Further research is very likely to have an impact on the estimate of effect and is likely to change the estimate. Very low  Any estimate of effect is very uncertain. The recommendations in these guidelines were graded into two categories:  A strong recommendation is one for which the Guideline Group was confident that the desirable effects of adhering to the recommendation outweigh the undesirable effects.  A weak or conditional recommendation is one for which the Guideline Group concluded that the desirable effects of adhering to the recommendation probably outweigh the undesirable effects, but the Guideline Group was not confident about these trade-offs.
## 2.5 Deciding upon recommendations
The Guideline Group met in Geneva in March 2017. Systematic reviews and GRADE tables were presented at the meeting. Formulation of recommendations and their relative strength were facilitated by the chair and supported by the methodologist, with the aim of achieving unanimous consensus. Full consensus was reached on all recommendations. Had there been disagreement, the planned procedure was for the Guideline Group to vote and accept the recommendation on a simple majority vote, with reporting of any objections. The Guideline Group used evidence-to-decision tables to guide it through the process of developing recommendations and to consider the quality of evidence, the balance between desirable and undesirable effects, values, resource use and cost-effectiveness, equity, acceptability and feasibility. The considerations are addressed in the body of the text of the document while Summary of judgments tables are included in the different Appendices following the Summary of findings tables. The WHO Steering Group noted remarks made by members of the Expert Peer Review Group and considered incorporating these into the final guidelines. One reviewer perceived the evidence on risk-benefit for newer medication to be insufficient and the price too high to mention them in any recommendation. Another reviewer was in favour of including DPP-4 inhibitors and TZDs along with human insulin for type 2 patients, in anticipation of patient expiry and the possibility of cheaper generic versions becoming available. The Guideline Group’s opinion was that there was considerable uncertainty over whether and when significantly cheaper versions would become widely available.
[page 16]
## 2.6 Funding
The development of these guidelines was financially supported by the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the World Health Organization.
## 3. Recommendations
The Guideline Group developed recommendations for oral hypoglycaemic agents for second- and third-line treatment in type 2 diabetes, for insulin in patients with type 2 diabetes for whom insulin is indicated, and for insulin for treating patients with type 1 diabetes.
## 3.1 Hypoglycaemic agents for second-line treatment in type 2 diabetes
1. Give a sulfonylurea to patients with type 2 diabetes who do not achieve glycaemic control with metformin alone or who have contraindications to metformin (strong recommendation, moderate quality evidence). Remarks Glibenclamide should be avoided in patients aged 60 years and older. Sulfonylureas with a better safety record for hypoglycaemia (e.g. gliclazide) are preferred in patients for whom hypoglycaemia is a concern (people who are at risk of falls, people who have impaired awareness of hypoglycaemia, people who live alone, people who drive or operate machinery as part of their job). The WHO PEN protocol recommends a target fasting blood glucose of <7 mmol/L (126 mg/dl). However, an individualized approach is encouraged in setting the patient’s target level for glycaemic control, taking into account their comorbidities, risks from medication side-effects and their likely benefit from tight glycaemic control in view of life expectancy.
## 3.1.1 Summary of the evidence
The evidence summary for second-line treatment intensification (adding medicines to metformin) was obtained from the systematic review and network meta-analysis carried out by the Methods and Applications Group for Indirect Treatment Comparisons (MAGIC) for the Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health (CADTH) (6). The systematic review included 166 Randomized Controlled Trials (RCTs) that reported at least one of the outcomes of interest. The network meta-analysis included sulfonylureas, DPP-4 inhibitors, SGLT-2 inhibitors, TZDs and basal insulins, as well as bolus insulins, biphasic insulins, meglitinides, alpha-glucosidase inhibitors, and glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) agonists (which were not of interest to the guidelines). All evaluated hypoglycaemic agents added to metformin performed similarly in lowering HbA1c compared to placebo. DPP-4 inhibitors performed less well compared to sulfonylurea (mean difference 0.12%, 95% CI: 0.01, 0.24) and TZD (mean difference 0.19%, 95% CI: 0.05, 0.33). There was lower risk of severe hypoglycaemia with DPP-4 inhibitors (OR 0.14, 95% CI: 0.07, 0.26) and SGLT-2 inhibitors (OR 0.09, 95% CI: 0.02, 0.44) compared to sulfonylurea. DPP-4 inhibitors and SGLT-2 inhibitors were associated with weight loss, while TZDs and basal insulin were associated with
[page 17]
weight gain. Evidence on quality of life and microvascular complications was not available. There were no significant differences for CVD incidence (myocardial infarction (MI) or stroke) or CVD mortality, but the network meta-analysis (NMA) model was not robust (very few events and a large number of trials with no events). In a separate analysis of patients at high risk of CVD, there was no significant difference in CVD mortality. Treatment matrices including the comparisons of all treatments with each other, and GRADE quality assessment, are reported in Appendix 5.
## 3.1.2 Rationale for the recommendation
Balance between desirable and undesirable effects While sulfonylureas showed a similar effect in lowering HbA1c compared to newer medicines, they also showed a higher odds of severe hypoglycaemia compared to DPP-4 inhibitors and SGLT-2 inhibitors. The Guideline Group noted the absence of estimates of absolute risk for severe hypoglycaemia in these trial reports but recognized that observational studies have shown that the risk of hypoglycaemia of varying severity in patients without renal impairment treated with sulfonylureas to be in the range from 0.2 to 1.8 events per 100 person-years (22, 23), which the Guideline Group considered not to be very high. The Guideline Group also recognized that there was large heterogeneity between the studies in how severe hypoglycaemia was defined. The Guideline Group acknowledged that SGLT-2 inhibitors look particularly promising, particularly for survival, but acknowledged this evidence derived from placebo-controlled studies. SGLT-2 inhibitors led to the greatest weight loss of all classes of medicines included in the NMA. Furthermore, empagliflozin, when compared to placebo, had a protective effect on a composite of death from cardiovascular causes, nonfatal myocardial infarction, or nonfatal stroke in one study in people at high CVD risk (24). More evidence is needed to determine whether this is a class effect and whether there is a cardioprotective effect in the general population of people with type 2 diabetes. Because SGLT-2 inhibitors are a relatively new class of drugs, more safety data is likely to emerge from ongoing trials and from their use outside trial populations. The Guideline Group also noted the lack of RCTs on how each new drug class compares with all the others (particularly new agents vs. old ones) and concluded that the evidence reviewed did not convincingly show the superiority or inferiority of any one class. Resource requirements The Guideline Group remarked that no substantial differences in health care staff capacity or mode of delivery are to be expected between the different oral hypoglycaemic agents. Differences in price between the oral agents are the main reason for difference in resources required, in addition to the resources required to address the drug side effects (which differ between the various agents). The use of insulin requires additional resources such as needles, blood-glucose self-monitoring and management at a higher level of care. Medicine prices were compared for a number of countries, selected on the basis of online public availability of official information on medicines prices (see Appendix 6). Sulfonylureas are invariably sold at substantially lower prices than DPP-4 inhibitors, SGLT-2 inhibitors and TZD. Reliable data on the prices of these medicines in low-income countries are not available, but it is unlikely that the new medicines have a more favourable price ratio to sulfonylurea in low- and middle-income countries than in high-income countries. Resources were unavailable for a multi-country study.
[page 18]
However, abundant anecdotal evidence supports the claim that these newer medicines are globally substantially higher priced than metformin and sulfonylurea. The Guideline Group recognized that some patents for DPP-4 inhibitors will soon expire and cheaper generics could appear on the market soon (25) because this has consistently happened with hypoglycaemic agents in the past. However, the Guideline Group concluded that the new oral hypoglycaemic agents are currently substantially more expensive compared to sulfonylureas, and that the modest clinical benefit (fewer events of severe hypoglycaemia and weight loss with DPP-4 inhibitors and SGLT-2 inhibitors) does not sufficiently outweigh the current price difference in the context of a public health approach. The health economist presented findings of a narrative literature review of cost-effectiveness studies of second-line treatment for type 2 diabetes (Appendix 7). The Guideline Group noted that the cost-effectiveness studies were not easily comparable because there was large heterogeneity between the different studies, e.g. in choice of model (e.g. Center for Outcomes Research (CORE) Diabetes Model, DiDACT, UKPDS); comprehensiveness of model; inclusion of indirect costs and level of cost detail related to diabetes complications; perspective (e.g. public health payer, single private hospital, etc); clinical practice and treatment regimens examined (e.g. treatment dosages, timing of treatment relative to meals); country-specific prices; and difference in country-specific utility tariffs. The Guideline Group further noted that all cost-effectiveness studies were carried out in high-income countries. Because cost-effectiveness studies are setting-specific, with cost-effectiveness thresholds higher in high-income than in middle- and low-income countries, it was difficult for the Guideline Group to translate these findings to low-resource settings. The Guideline Group also noted that that industry-funded cost-effectiveness studies tended to report that new treatments were cost-effective (26–31), while the only independent study favoured sulfonylurea (32). Health equity The Guideline Group noted that in 2013 the 18th WHO Expert Committee on the Selection and Use of Essential Medicines replaced glibenclamide in the core list with gliclazide, and added that glibenclamide should not be used in patients aged 60 years and older because of concerns about hypoglycaemia in this group (9). The Guideline Group agreed with this assessment and adopted this into the recommendation. Because sulfonylurea is currently more affordable than new oral hypoglycaemic agents (OHAs) for people who pay out of pocket, it is likely to be more accessible, thus contributing to greater equity. Acceptability (patient preferences) A literature review (Appendix 8) found the treatment characteristics patients valued most when choosing between treatment regimens were avoidance of side-effects, particularly hypoglycaemia. While the newer agents generally had a neutral or slightly better profile for hypoglycaemia compared to sulfonylurea as measured by relative risk, there was insufficient evidence about the magnitude of the absolute risk. The Guideline Group therefore concluded that the putative benefit of newer agents did not justify the large difference in price.
[page 19]
Feasibility Sulfonylurea was recommended as second-line treatment in WHO PEN 2013 and has been shown to be acceptable and feasible (1). Sulfonylureas have been in use for 60 years and remain in use globally.
## 3.2 Hypoglycaemic agents for third-line treatment in type 2 diabetes
2. Introduce human insulin treatment to patients with type 2 diabetes who do not achieve glycaemic control with metformin and/or sulfonylurea (strong recommendation, very low-quality evidence). 3. If insulin is unsuitable, a DPP-4 inhibitor, SGLT-2 inhibitor or a TZD may be added (weak recommendation, very low-quality evidence). Remark Insulin treatment could be unsuitable when circumstances make its use difficult (e.g. persons who live alone and are dependent on others to inject them with insulin).
## 3.2.1 Summary of evidence
The evidence summary for third line treatment (medicines added to metformin and sulfonylurea) was obtained from a systematic review and network meta-analysis that was published in 2016 (12). Five trials evaluated triple therapy. The network meta-analysis included DPP-4 inhibitors, SGLT-2 inhibitors, TZDs, basal insulin (medicines of interest to this guideline) as well as meglitinides, alpha-glucosidase inhibitors, GLP-1 agonists, and basal-bolus insulin (medicines not of interest for these guidelines). All drug classes lowered HbA1c to a similar extent. TZDs (mean difference: -0.86%, 95% CI: -0.25, -1.48) and basal insulin (mean difference: -0.86%, 95% CI: -0.18, -1.55) were the only two medicines that performed significantly better than placebo in lowering HbA1c. DPP-4 inhibitors (mean difference: -0.23kg, 95% CI: -0.46, 0.00) and SGLT-2 inhibitors (mean difference: -0.33kg, 95% CI: -0.59, -0.07) were associated with a lower body weight compared to TZDs. There were very few events of CVD mortality and no significant differences between treatments. Insufficient observations were available to generate evidence networks for CVD incidence. There were no data for the critical outcomes severe hypoglycaemia and quality of life. Treatment matrices, including the comparisons of all treatments with each other and GRADE quality assessment, are reported in Appendix 9.
## 3.2.2 Rationale for the recommendation
Balance between desirable and undesirable effects The Guideline Group considered insulin to be comparable to DPP-4 inhibitors, SGLT 2-inhibitors or TZDs when weighing desirable and undesirable effects. Insulin and TZDs performed best for lowering HbA1c while DPP-4 inhibitors and SGLT-2 inhibitors performed better than TZDs in lowering body weight. Basal insulin did not lead to statistically significant increase in body weight compared to the
[page 20]
oral drugs when added to metformin and sulfonylurea. All drug classes were associated with an increased risk of hypoglycaemia compared to placebo, but there were no statistically significant differences between the drug classes. The long-term benefits and harms of triple therapy with three oral agents are unclear. The Guideline Group discussed the clinical trial observation that type 2 diabetes is a progressive disease with increasing beta cell dysfunction and that many patients will eventually require insulin (33, 34). Resource requirements Human insulin is available at lower prices than the three newer, oral medicines in most countries listed in Appendix 6. However, the Guideline Group recognized that insulin treatment has further associated resource implications such as needles and blood glucose self-monitoring. Furthermore, in low-resource settings, introducing insulin and follow-up is typically done by medically qualified health care staff at higher levels of care. How much this additional need for resources when using insulin affects the cost difference between insulin and newer oral agents has not been estimated, but they certainly reduce the advantage due to the lower cost of insulin. Health equity Because human insulin is currently more affordable than new OHAs for people who pay out of pocket, it is likely to be more accessible to people, thus contributing to greater equity. On the other hand, in low-resource settings, people on insulin are usually managed at higher levels of care which are often more difficult to access than primary care facilities. How these differences impact outcomes is unclear. Acceptability (patient preferences) A literature review of treatment preferences of patients with type 2 diabetes (Appendix 8) identified three RCTs comparing treatment intensification with oral agents to treatment intensification with insulin (35, 36, 37, 38). Two of the three studies found a greater treatment satisfaction with the addition of insulin compared to the addition of an oral agent, while one study found high levels of satisfaction in both groups. The Guideline Group had some reservations about the results of the RCTs because of potential bias (all three RCTs were sponsored by insulin manufacturers). The literature review also identified three discrete choice experiments describing preferences and treatment attributes that contribute to treatment satisfaction (39, 40 41). The treatment characteristics that patients valued most when choosing between treatment regimens were route of administration, avoiding or reducing the number of injections, side effects, avoidance of nausea, glycaemic control, avoiding hypoglycaemia, avoiding weight gain, reducing CVD risk, and reducing frequency of blood glucose monitoring. The Guideline Group interpreted these preferred treatment characteristics to indicate that most patients prefer oral agents to insulin if glycaemic control were comparable. However, patient preference for newer oral agents was not deemed a sufficiently strong reason to recommend them in the context of a public health approach because the price of newer oral medicines is currently higher than that of human insulin. Feasibility Metformin for first-line treatment, sulfonylurea for second-line treatment, and insulin for third-line treatment was recommended in WHO PEN 2013. It has been shown that it can be implemented in primary health care with referrals to higher levels of health care for insulin introduction and periodic
[page 21]
specialist assessment. The Guideline Group emphasized that patients should receive support for insulin initiation and they point out that the use of insulin requires more monitoring and more patient visits. Nonetheless, this is a simple approach, using well-known medicines that are widely available and are currently more affordable than new treatments of similar effectiveness.
## 3.3 Insulin
4. Use human insulin to control blood glucose levels in adults with type 1 diabetes, and in adults with type 2 diabetes for whom insulin is indicated (strong recommendation, low-quality evidence). Remarks Recommendation 4 covers both short-acting (regular human insulin – RHI) and intermediate-acting human insulin (NPH insulin). The recommendation is strong because evidence of better effectiveness of insulin analogues is lacking and human insulin has a better resource-use profile. 5. Consider long-acting insulin analogues to control blood glucose levels in adults with type 1 or type 2 diabetes who have frequent severe hypoglycaemia with human insulin (weak recommendation, moderate-quality evidence for severe hypoglycaemia). Remarks Recommendation 5 is a weak recommendation reflecting the lack of, or very low-quality, evidence for any of the long-term outcomes such as chronic diabetes complications and mortality, and the considerable higher costs for long-acting insulin analogues compared to intermediate-acting human insulin.
## 3.3.1 Summary of the evidence
Two recent, high-quality systematic reviews and preliminary results from a Cochrane Review update were used to answer the questions. The first systematic review compared long-acting insulin analogues to intermediate-acting human insulin for type 1 diabetes (11) and the second systematic review compared a short-acting insulin analogue to a short-acting human insulin for type 1 diabetes (13). The third systematic review evaluated long-acting insulin analogues versus NPH insulin for type 2 diabetes (42). Long-acting insulin analogues in type 1 diabetes The population in the review consisted of non-pregnant adults with type 1 diabetes. The systematic review included a network meta-analysis comparing different treatment regimens (e.g. insulin detemir, insulin glargine, NPH) and in different administration frequencies (e.g. once daily, twice daily, four times daily) (11). For the purpose of the guideline development, NPH administered twice daily was considered to be usual care (that is, the reference standard). Glargine once a day and detemir once or twice a day were the relevant interventions. Because direct pair-wise meta-analyses
[page 22]
were available for the comparisons of interest, and there was consistency between direct and combined-direct and indirect estimates, direct results were used. Neither detemir once or twice daily (mean difference -0.04, 95% CI: -0.12, 0.03) nor glargine once daily (mean difference -0.08, 95% CI: -0.19, 0.02) significantly reduced HbA1c compared to NPH once or twice daily. Detemir once or twice daily was superior to NPH once or twice daily for reducing the number of severe hypoglycaemia incidents (OR 0.68, 95% CI: 0.52, 0.89). Although glargine appeared to reduce the risk of severe hypoglycaemia compared to NPH, the difference was not statistically significant. There was no significant difference between analogues and NPH in all-cause mortality, with one death reported in the treatment and control arms. Two studies reported on CVD mortality, with both reporting one CVD death in the control group; in neither study was there a significant difference between the two groups. There were no data for the other critical outcomes – progression of nephropathy, end-stage renal disease, lower-limb amputation or ketoacidosis. The only RCT reporting on quality of life did not find a difference between glargine once daily and NPH twice daily. GRADE Summary of findings tables are reported in Appendix 10. Short-acting insulin analogues in type 1 diabetes The systematic review included nine trials and 2693 participants (13). The population consisted of non-pregnant adults with type 1 diabetes. Short-acting insulin analogues significantly reduced HbA1c compared to short-acting human insulin (mean difference -0.15%, 95% CI: -0.20, -0.10). Mortality was not a primary outcome in any of the included trials, but in six trials that reported deaths as adverse events there was one death in the treatment arm. There was no significant reduction in severe hypoglycaemic episodes when using short-acting insulin analogues compared to RHI (OR 0.89, 95% CI: 0.71% , 1.12%). Health-related quality of life was assessed in subpopulations of three trials but no details were reported. Overall, there was no clear evidence for a substantial effect of short-acting insulin analogues on this outcome. Outcomes were not reported for critical outcomes of CVD mortality, progression of nephropathy, visual impairment, end-stage renal disease, lower limb amputation or ketoacidosis. The GRADE Summary of findings table is reported in Appendix 11. Long-acting analogues in type 2 diabetes Preliminary results of an update of the Cochrane Reviews on long-acting insulin analogues versus NPH insulin for type 2 diabetes (42) were presented to the Guideline Group. The preliminary results of the meta-analyses showed no significant difference in HbA1c between NPH insulin and glargine (mean difference 0%, 95%CI: -0.09, 0.08) or detemir (mean difference 0.18%, 95%CI: -0.01, 0.38). The evidence on HbA1c difference was of very low (glargine) and low quality (detemir). There were fewer severe hypoglycaemic events with glargine (OR 0.65, 95%CI: 0.49, 0.88) or detemir (OR 0.37, 95%CI: 0.16, 0.92)compared to NPH (moderate quality evidence); and lower body weight (mean difference: -1.26kg, 95%CI: -1.78, - 0.73) with detemir compared to NPH (high quality evidence). The findings were interpreted with caution because analyses had not been completed (e.g. potential impact of various therapeutic schemes, context-specific interpretations missing, sensitivity or subgroup analyses not yet done, high heterogeneity of study results not yet explored, predictive intervals not yet calculated). A review of the evidence on short-acting insulins for type 2 diabetes was not considered to be a priority.
[page 23]
## 3.3.2 Rationale for the recommendations
Balance between desirable and undesirable effects Human insulin and insulin analogues are equally effective at lowering blood glucose levels. Although short-acting insulin analogues statistically significantly reduced HbA1c compared to short-acting human insulin, the Guideline Group did not consider this to be a clinically meaningful reduction according to criteria widely used in clinical guidelines and recommendations of medicines licensing bodies (10, 43). Long-acting insulin analogues are associated with a moderate reduction in risk of severe hypoglycaemia and small reduction in body weight compared with NPH insulin. The Guideline Group noted the absence of data on nocturnal hypoglycaemia and the lack of evidence on long-term critical outcomes such as complications and mortality. Resource requirements Resource requirements were a leading concern for the Guideline Group. Long-acting insulin analogues have marginal benefits in preventing severe hypoglycaemia but both long-acting insulin analogues and short-acting insulin analogues are considerably more expensive than human insulins. The Guideline Group considered the resources needed for the different methods for insulin delivery, concluding that both human insulin and insulin analogues are packaged in vials for use with needles and syringes, in cartridges for use with pen-injectors and pre-filled pen-injectors. Cold chain requirements and patient monitoring of blood glucose are also the same for both types of insulin and would not lead to different resource requirements. Thus, the price is the main difference between human insulin and insulin analogues when it comes to resource requirements. Buying human insulin instead of insulin analogues would have significant impact on country budgets in settings where governments aim to achieve universal health coverage (4, 44). In the absence of universal health coverage, insulin analogues are far more expensive for patients paying out-of-pocket (4, 44). Considering that patients with type 1 diabetes cannot survive without insulin, ensuring access to affordable insulin for all patients with type 1 diabetes is a priority. The Guideline Group noted that most cost-effectiveness studies showed that insulin analogues were cost-effective compared to human insulin, but all these studies were funded by the manufacturers of these insulins (Appendix 6). Independent cost-effectiveness studies generally showed that human insulin was more cost-effective. Taking into account that cost-effectiveness is context-specific and that there was only one study from a middle-income country (45) and no studies from low-income countries, the Guideline Group put more weight on the affordability findings of the Addressing the Challenge and Constraints of Insulin Sources and Supply (ACCISS) study. Thus, considering the consistently and substantially higher prices for insulin analogues and the potential negative consequences for access, the Guideline Group strongly preferred human insulin. Health equity The guidelines are based on a public health approach. By addressing the health needs of a population, the recommendations are aimed at ensuring the widest possible access to services and medicines at population level. The Guideline Group reiterated that such an approach is most likely to optimize equity with respect to access to affordable medicines (46).
[page 24]
Acceptability (patient preferences) The findings of a narrative review of preferences related to type of insulin for treatment of type 1 diabetes were presented to the Guideline Group (Appendix 7). Four studies comparing long-acting analogue and intermediate-acting human insulin found significantly higher satisfaction with analogue insulin. Of eight studies comparing short-acting analogue insulin and short-acting human insulin, two studies, including the single study that was blinded, found no difference in satisfaction scores between groups, while six studies found significantly higher satisfaction scores with short-acting analogue insulin. Of the studies comparing biphasic insulin or basal-bolus regimens, one study found patients preferred the analogue insulin and one study found no difference between groups. The following treatment characteristics were reported to influence treatment satisfaction: treatment or dietary flexibility, convenience, reducing perceived hyperglycaemia or hypoglycaemia, improving stability of blood glucose levels, and reducing fatigue. The Guideline Group recognized that almost all included studies were at high risk of bias, and in the single blinded study patients could not distinguish which type of insulin they were receiving. It was therefore difficult to take into account patient preferences and acceptability of different types of insulin. Feasibility The Guideline Group expressed some concern about the transferability of findings from clinical trial settings in predominantly high-income countries to routine health care practice in middle- and low income settings, especially considering the rapidly increasing prevalence of diabetes in these settings. The Guideline Group concluded by basing its recommendations on the available evidence and addressed their concerns in the section on research gaps later in the guideline document.
## 4. Research gaps
During the review of evidence and the development of recommendations, several research gaps were identified. Addressing these will help inform revision of these guidelines. Operational research studies evaluating the effectiveness of treatment under routine conditions in health care practice in low-income countries, as opposed to the highly controlled environment of trials, are required. In addition there should be studies exploring barriers to access to care and studies evaluating context-specific interventions to enhance patient adherence.
## 4.1. Oral hypoglycaemic agents
Trials of new oral hypoglycemic agents should include metformin and sulfonylurea as comparators, rather than placebo only. This is most important for long-term, hard outcomes for which there are very little data in samples that representative of the general diabetic population.
[page 25]
There are questions remaining regarding treatment options and combination of medicines for type 2 diabetes, including whether adding a third oral agent postpones the need for introducing insulin and if so, by how long; and role for combining new oral agents with insulin. For newer medicines there is the need for continuous surveillance of side effects.
## 4.2 Insulin
Epidemiological research into the burden of diabetes (particularly type 1 diabetes) in low-income countries is needed. Estimates of the number of children and adults with type 1 diabetes in many countries are likely inaccurate, leading to difficulties in procurement because of uncertainties about the number of people who are in need of insulin.
## 5. Publication, implementation and evaluation
## 5.1 Publication
The guideline will be available to download from the WHO website. Systematic reviews and evidence used for the development of the guideline are published in peer-reviewed journals or available online.
## 5.2 Implementation and dissemination
WHO regional and country offices, through their contacts with ministries of health, will encourage implementation at country level. WHO will provide technical assistance if substantial country adaptation is needed. The updated recommendations will be part of the technical package of the recently launched WHO Global Hearts Initiative, built on the WHO PEN – an initiative to improve prevention of CVD in primary health care.
## 5.3 Evaluation
WHO will monitor uptake and implementation of the guidelines in national policies and programmes by reviewing the number of countries that have adapted or endorsed the guidelines nationally. The Global HEARTS technical package that is currently being developed will include clinical and process indicators for diabetes. Indicators will use routinely collected data on service delivery using client screening forms, registers and monthly summary forms. The toolkit will be piloted in Barbados, Colombia, Ethiopia, Nepal, the Philippines, Tajikistan and Uganda.
[page 26]
## 5.4 Future updating of the guideline
The guidelines are expected to be valid for a period of 5 years. This period reflects the fact that new research findings are likely to become available in the meantime but also represents a feasible time frame considering the costs, time and other resources that are needed to update such guidelines. If the evidence base or user needs change before the 5-year mark, consideration will be given to producing updates sooner. Of particular relevance for an update would be clinical trials that compare sulfonylurea and metformin with newer agents in their effect on the incidence of CVD, mortality, and hard outcomes of kidney and eye complications. Such trials require more time than those for surrogate outcomes such as glycaemic control and – particularly those that are independent from industry funding – are rare. The existing body of evidence on glycaemic control and hypoglycaemia is relatively robust and unlikely to change by adding new trial data.
